This is Ryan Jorgensen. The date is November 18th,
1985. We're in the Trigon at Texas A&M University
in College Station. And today I'm interviewing
Colonel Donald Burton about his experiences in
Vietnam. Colonel Burton, can you tell me your
birthplace and date? Yes, I was born in Waco,
Texas, April 14th, 1935. Okay, thank you. And when
were you stationed in Vietnam? I went to Vietnam on
two occasions. The first time was in 1966 in
Vietnam. in the spring. That was a temporary duty
assignment. I went there with a team of people from
a field artillery school, primarily to work on the
maintenance situation with 8 inch and 175
millimeter howitzers, which had a tremendous
deadline rate. That means that they were
inoperative. And our mission was to go over and
find out why the weapon system was not doing well in
Vietnam, and number two, to conduct classes on
maintenance. parts supply and operation of the
thing. That started out to be a two-week trip,
which wound up being about a two-month stay. I see.
And what was your second visit? Second was my
assignment there. I went over with 41st Artillery
Group in 1967. I see. What did you find with your
weapons? Well, we found typically that the
weapons were being poorly maintained. Parts
supply system was not working properly at any
level and there was quite a bit of abuse of the
weapons system and it's just a typical thing, you
know, you publish instructions and lessons
learned on how to operate the system, but whether
people read it or not is something else again. So
it's very profitable because we cured that
problem within a six-week period of time. Oh,
that's good. I see. And how long was your second
assignment? A year. One year. Yeah, I stayed a
year. Okay. And what did that entail with the 41st?
My assignment with the 41st Artillery Group, I was
the group adjutant, which the group adjutant runs
the administration, the personnel and the
discipline systems for an organization. I spent
six months with the 41st Artillery Group all over
Vietnam because that group had nine battalions
under it. And then became the S-1 or the personnel
staff officer for 1st Field Force Artillery
Headquarters, which is the core artillery
headquarters station in Nha Trang. I see. What was
our overall strategy in Vietnam? Well, that
varies in what year you're talking about. When you
were there, in 67? Well, basically in early days,
our strategy was one of combat. We were attempting
to engage both the PLA forces, or VC forces, if you
will, and main force forces where we found them. So
there was a considerable amount of what's called
search and destroy missions and circumvent
missions, forays, raids, the whole works. Also,
there was a considerable effort in the mid-60s to
do a lot of stabilization at the local level in
support of the school systems, to assist in land
reform, to assist in keeping the communication
routes open, and so forth. And how successful were
those? Well, it was very successful. I think
that... On a localized basis now. You have to
realize that on a national basis, we didn't have
the same thing. If we had, you wouldn't have the
continual collapse of governments that you saw.
And it's very important to realize that
what went on at the local level and what went on at
the national level was two different things. And
the tie-in between the two wasn't often good
because we did not take over that country. We just
tried to encourage their own government to
establish itself and run it. And the biggest
problem was what I call a political communication
between the government of Saigon and on down to the
states, the districts, the villages, and right on
down. It's just a tremendously different thing.
The government of Saigon was corrupt and
inefficient? Well, I can't comment on being
corrupt and inefficient. I think that when you say
corrupt and inefficient, you're talking about
Oriental governments in general, by our
standards. But certainly... We saw during that
era of a few short years a change of government
about four times. So I don't think anybody was too
happy with the governments at hand, and they
collapsed one after the other. How well did the
military attack adapt to the jungle environment
of Vietnam? Well, I think that we had – Good
training going on. I think we had a good program to
introduce people into the country. We just didn't
bring soldiers in and stick them out in the jungle.
Most people had training programs on the ground
once they got there. You made sure a guy really did
know how to handle his weapons. It was
acclimatized. And prior to deployment in those
days, remember, that was an era of deployment
because we were building up. So most people going
over were going as units and not as individual
replacements, which came later in the early 70s.
So in those days, the units that were going over
were getting considerable training before they
were shipped to Vietnam. And as good a surrogate
environment as could be built on several military
installations with constructed villages and
things like that. Were we prepared for guerrilla
warfare? Oh, I don't think that the lack of
preparation for guerrilla warfare was ever an
issue. The answer to that is yes. We held our own. We
went to school on the British successes in
Malaysia. We had taken good look at everything
going on in Indonesia. We were students of what the
French had done right and wrong. So as far as at the
small unit level, Climbing ties into the various
crane situations was not a problem, nor what you
call guerrilla warfare, which is really small
unit warfare. So the snipers and the booby traps
and so on did not... We were just as good as they were
at that. It's all very mean stuff, but you learn to
cope with that. In fact, I don't think that... any
organization was quite effective as our Green
Beret organizations in that area were quite good.
How were the Green Berets special? Well, that was
their forte. That was their training. Their
training was to operate in small units under
adverse conditions and independently. But it was
an organization that was designed not only to
fight, but to have political influence, to have
influence on organization of villages, to to do a
wide gamut of things not just related to combat.
They're a development agency, if you will, which
had a combat role. And how much of a percentage were
the Green Braids in relation to the total forces? I
really would hesitate to speculate on that. I'm
sure there are statistics available. But in terms
of The number of divisions and independent
regiments there, the Green Berets were probably
120 up to that point. And how would the other 1920s
be rated? Well, all of our divisions were good. The
1st Cavalry Division, 1st Marine Division, 4th
Infantry Division, 101st Airborne Division, all
those were, the 9th Division, all those did quite
well. Of course, what they were doing is they were
having to invent the tactics that worked along the
way because we did exceedingly well in combat
against main force units and against Viet Cong
which were organized into battalions. But you
have to realize that this was a very protracted war
and frequently you weren't in combat simply
because you couldn't find those you wanted to
combat. I imagine. How closely did we work with
Arvin? Very closely. We have probably one of the
most elaborate military advisory and military
mission systems ever fielded with respect to
working with the Vietnamese Army. Every unit in
the Vietnamese Army and Air Force to company level
and often to platoon level, had US advisors who
were there to help them train and to work. Very
frequently, their approach to their tactics and
their operations was totally different than
ours. What would be some of the differences? Well,
you have to understand that while we wanted to get
in there and win the battle, they might not wish to
do that unless they were politically expedient to
do so. So you have a lot of vested self-interest in
that military structure they had and a lot of,
well, political ploy, if you will, because that's
just New Orleans. And particularly the
Vietnamese are completely totally different.
How do you encircle ploy? Well, first off,
Frequently a commander of some unit would want to
know what the rewards to him would be to conduct an
attack as opposed to being devoted to the mission.
But the Western, and particularly U.S. approach
to combat is somewhat different than the Oriental
approach. I imagine. It's a strange way to fight a
war. Well, it's not strange to be at the meeting
zone. Were they quality fighters?
Some of the Vietnamese army forces were
outstanding soldiers. 22nd Army Division in
particular, which I probably had more contact
with than anybody, were very good. But you also had
a lot of regional and territorial forces, which
were less trained. And you also have to understand
that in Vietnam, you've got a Vietnamese culture
that traces itself back to 500 B.C. But you also
have about 15% of the population which are
minorities, tribesmen, not really the
Vietnamese central culture that you think of.
They were less well-trained and less
well-organized, less well-equipped, and
considerably less motivated. I see. And yet they
were considered part of Arvin all the same. Well,
you know, while we, as well as the Arvin, would
think of Arvin taking charge of and controlling
areas of terrain, real estate, if you will, they
were less inclined to be worried about that. If
things weren't favorable, they just moved off
somewhere. That brings up something that I've
read a lot, that in a lot of cases, we weren't so much
concerned with terrain as just with the body
counts and with, you know, killing VC rather
than... Well, I don't know that that was the case at
the unit level.
Quite honestly, in especially in later years body
count got to be a sort of a measure of success which i
really question because that's that's not a very
good measure i don't think most soldiers accept
that as a good measure
simply because it's a long-term result that
counts not how many people you killed on a
particular day and The body count thing really got
to be a measure of success, if you will, when
someone was trying to estimate the effectiveness
of opposing forces after a battle. In other words,
were they a viable, effective force anymore? And
of course, that's not really key in making a
difference how many people are killed in battle.
What really counts is the ultimate outcome. and
the stability that does or does not result
thereafter. I see. So why did we use body count?
Well, my personal perspective, that's what the
civilians were demanding. Results in one form or
another? Sure, results. And it's just very
unfortunate that we ran some things the way we did.
I have personally felt that... the business of six
month command tours for commanders was a disaster
because you keep changing commanders every six
months and you just don't have the opportunity to
really settle into your area of responsibility
with a group of professionals. And too often, I'm
afraid, commanders try to make their mark in that
six months rather than waging a prolonged and
protracted approach to what their
responsibilities were. was also very much not in
favor of the one-year tour. What would be a good
line? I think that we should have put soldiers in
there and left until we won. We've done that in
other wars, and why this one was run that way, I
don't know, except for obvious pressures and lack
of support within civilian populations in the
United States for the war in the first place. So I
think that was more of an expedient to make that a
one-year tour, get in and get out. And, of course,
the result of that is when you've got a new soldier
in, It was probably in his eighth month that he
really became effective and really
acclimatized. And you could depend on him to be a
really good warrior. And then with the 12-month
tour, by the time he hit his 10th month, he didn't
want to take chances anymore. So I guess your peak
of efficiency was there 8th through the 10th
month, and you kind of had to work with that
attitude. Why was the officer only six months, the
officer's tour only six months long? Why was it
shorter? Well, for a variety of reasons. With a
one-year tour, I think what they like to do is put
people in command and then bring them up with their
experience to work at the staff levels. Also, it
gave more people an opportunity to serve in
command positions. Now, one of the things that is
kind of a curiosity but very true, one thing that a
one-year tour and a six-month command did, it put a
lot of Americans through Vietnam.
That is one thing we have as an advantage over the
Russians, because our military today,
especially those who serve in Vietnam, have
combat experience. A lot of them got it in various
jobs. And the Russians don't have that. They're
getting it right now in Afghanistan. But
unfortunately, most of those officers are not the
Russians we'll be looking at in Europe. Was the
mass amount of bombing necessary and effective?
Some of the so-called saturation bombing is very
effective. Some of it wasn't. And I think that, you
know, I'm a field artilleryman, so I can speak to
the delivery of indirect fires, too. When I first
arrived in 67, there was quite a bit of shelling
going on based on sightings of VC activity that
maybe even trained myself. We got that. stopped
early on because it's number one not cost
effective and number two useless so our
intelligence began to improve because we began to
get commanders in the field artillery who
realized it was futile to shoot shells out there
unless you had a real target the so-called
harassment and interdiction fires is uh
ineffective you know that's that's just sort of a
deal where you shoot it out there, and if
somebody's there to find or not, you just wasted
it. Well, out of that, it lulls the operation into
thinking that they're being affected when
they're not. And what you really have to do is put
the heat on the intelligence community. And in
Vietnam, that was one of our major problems, was
the collection of intelligence. Why? Well,
because you're dealing with a totally alien
environment and a society whose attitudes and
values are completely different from you, and who
realize the protracted nature of any type of war.
So you really had to work to get your intelligence
and then make sure it was accurate. Did we have much
of an intelligence complex set up before? Oh yeah,
we had tremendous intelligence effort both in
surveillance human intelligence, and crypto
intelligence, the whole thing, and very
effective, too. But sometimes the timing of when
you got your intelligence was such that it was no
longer of value to you immediately on a
battlefield because it was so old by the time you
got it. Oh, and it wasn't his impression. Most of
the real successes came because battles
developed, starting from what might wind up as a
skirmish between two patrols which developed
into a confrontation between two divisions
before it was over with. So by accident rather than
planned invasion? Not necessarily by accident,
but they had a very good system of protecting their
locations also. How would you rate the American
military leadership in Vietnam? Well, it varied.
Pretty obviously, that's well documented. We had
some outstanding leadership and we had some that
probably wasn't so good. I think one of the unique
studies and leadership and the failure thereof as
contained in the Peers Committee report, which I
mentioned you might want to read, which led up to
the knee line thing. And really that was a very
tragic incident that need not have ever occurred
if people understood what their mission was and if
the entire chain of command had been down there
making sure the orders had been properly
interpreted and carried out. So why do you think
they did occur? Largely, you have a situation
where you had a unit which had taken a lot of
casualties. You had leadership which,
at the company level, which probably wasn't the
best. And you had an interpretation of orders and
instructions which was singularly devised by
people at company level. And I think you had at
battalion and above level a kind of an urging of the
units involved that you better do a good job this
time. You haven't in the past. Their heads are
going to roll if this operation doesn't go
smoothly. And then I think that there was some
confusion in the orders that were issued from
division level on down. How did they get Garvin?
Well, I think they were not clear. and that they
were interpreted at every level, and that people
who issued the orders in the first place were not in
a position to make sure the plan was going the way
they had directed. And one of the criticisms I've
had, and it's a real quandary problem, is that we
had too many commanders who spent their time
flying around in helicopters over the
battlefield, and they could not get down on the
battlefield and influence the action when they
needed to. Why is that? Why were they in the
helicopter? Communication, primarily. You can
see more, you can communicate further, but you
lack that sense of being there when you're on the
end of a radio and flying over the battlefield. So
it just leaves interpretations of what the
mission was to the people who are on the ground and
you're not there to stop things or change things
when they need to be. Was there much inter-service
rivalry in Vietnam between the various? No, I
wouldn't say there was inter-service rivalry, at
least at my operating level. There may have been up
above. I'm sure everybody wants to grab the glory,
you know. But as far as an actual combat situation,
there's a great deal of cooperation.
What does the word fragging mean? Oh, well, that
referred to a phenomenon that began to take place
in the late 70s.
I'd left, so I never heard of a frag against that
point. I'd left in 1968. In the early 70s, I think
continuing weakness in leadership and
continuing lack of support for the mission, kind
of a... improper indoctrination of the soldiers
that were sitting there. Above all, dragging the
bottom of the barrel at some of the draftees and
inductees we were getting at the time and the drug
problems that were being imported caused the
so-called fragging. Fragging just means that
somebody has thrown a grenade in their platoon
leader or platoon sergeant's temp, which is a form
of mutiny, if you will.
Those incidents were highly overplayed. That
occurred, but not to the great degree that I think
the public was awful at believing. And when it did
occur, you probably found a breakdown of
leadership or a group of people that should have
been gotten out of there early. Was there much drug
use? Yeah, toward the end, quite a bit. Sure. Why?
Why? Look at the population of the United States.
The whole population was on drugs. Why not the
soldiers that were being sent over there? They
probably had more anxiety and cause to experiment
with marijuana and other things and people back
up. And how much effect do you think that had on our
ability to fight effectively? Well, I think it
screwed up the whole nation's morale. I don't
think that got turned around until within the last
five years, as a matter of fact. In Vietnam, did it
affect the soldier? How much did it affect the
armed forces, their ability to fight? I think it
had a tremendous impact because obviously
somebody's got his head screwed up, can't be
relied on, nor trusted in any form, shape, or
fashion.
How did you perceive that the media handled the
coverage of the war? Oh, that was very
independent. Independent on who you're talking
to. The biggest problem I had with, quote, media
was not the media themselves. And there were a lot
of outstanding correspondents that I knew that
did a tremendous job. But they began to be so
pressed for deadlines that if the the news by a
certain time, and frequently they would turn in
anything that looked like a story even before it
transpired.
You know, when you start a battle, particularly
around 5 o'clock in the afternoon, it doesn't even
really get good until about 8 p.m. But those guys
are all left at 5.15 to make their deadlines, so
they never were around for the real stuff too
often. But the guy that went to the field and stayed
with you did a good job. And we're talking
correspondence there as opposed to...
television and radio folks who I thought did
somewhat less of a professional job. How so? Well,
they just were news makers rather than reporters.
If there wasn't anything going on, they'd admit
something. And did that affect the Dwar effort at
home adversely? I don't think there's any
question, but what slanted reporting,
particularly in the television media,
undoubtedly had an impact on the national morale.
On the other hand, I would not lay a blanket
criticism on the press either, or the television,
because I think that many of the things they
reported on that sounded adverse were probably
accurate. How did you view draft evaders and
anti-war activists? Well, you know, nobody likes
a draft evader and a guy who runs off to Canada or
Sweden. But you have to realize that's occurred in
every war we've been in. There were far fewer draft
evaders and deserters and so forth in the Vietnam
War than there were in the U.S. Civil War. By a wide
margin. But look at the statistics. Nobody ever
thinks of that. In fact, there were very few,
compared to places, even compared to the Korean
War. If you go dig out the facts. Even in the late 70s
with the state movement and everything else
getting... Yeah, I'd say so. So did it have much of
an effect on troop morale? I don't think it had much
of an effect on troop morale. I mean, the troops
didn't like them. But then, many troops didn't
like guys who hid out in colleges getting degree
after degree and their PhDs simply to avoid
military service. And some of them are now
faculty. I imagine. So what was the mood in Vietnam
when you left in 68, is that right? Yeah. What was
the mood then? Well, first off, when you say when I
left, that's a good one, because I left in April,
and recall that we'd had a major 10 offensive in 68
in February. Now, clearly at our level, at the
soldier level, we knew damn well we would have
kicked the dickens out of them, there was no
question. It was an absolute decimation of a
couple of main divisions and the V.C. Front Army.
Now, having said that, it was also obvious at
higher levels that they had demonstrated their
ability to launch such an attack. And I think that
most people had accepted assurances, accurately
or inaccurately, which probably were delivered
for political purposes that no such thing could
occur. So I think it was a general shake-up of the,
shall we say, the confidence at governmental
levels. I think this led to some, while we won the
battle on the ground, we probably lost the battle
on the political level, particularly at the
negotiating tables. What was your role
specifically in Tet? What was your, or were you?
Well, as I say, I was personnel officer of the 1st
Steel Artillery in the train. We got hit directly
there.
Basically, my role was to sit out the night and keep
things secure in my area until we got things looked
up in the morning. It was largely a matter of
ensuring that the security plans for the city were
operating, and they were. When you say personnel
officer, what What did that entail? Oh, the
personnel officer is responsible for all
assignments, replacements, casualties,
decorations and awards, moving people from one
place to another, keeping the strength up, making
sure that the medical facility's working, making
sure the chaplain's working, you name it. It's
everything to do with the life of the soldier, if
you will. I see. Why did we lose the war? I don't
think we lost the war. I think that's a matter of
conjecture there. I think that
I think the real thing here is not a matter of
losing, it's a matter of deciding if we had
invested enough into it and withdrawing. I
wouldn't call it lost because that pretends that
you got beat on the battlefield right out of
country and that certainly isn't what occurred.
We started withdrawing and cutting our support
because I think our national leaders decided that
that was a sump of national manpower and national
fortunate that we didn't want to support any more,
which is unfortunate. What would it have taken to
have won? I don't know. But if we had a commitment to
do so, we should have stuck with it. And is it in
politics? Well, certainly. That's the basis for
having a war anyway, is the political aspect.
There are six elements of national power, and the
political one is the one that's supposed to be
preeminent in a situation like this. element
fails and the statesmanship fails, then you go to
war. What are you going to do? You've got to give a
mission and make sure it's clearly understood.
That's one of the biggest troubles the military
had, was understanding what their mission was.
You know, you're going to conduct an attack in
order to stabilize the government of South
Vietnam. Hell, that's not a mission. If your
mission is to destroy, seize, hold, occupy,
that's a mission. But these nebulous things with
respect to designing military missions in
political terms just don't happen. What else
could we have done outside of the military arena in
order to make it a national mission? Well, in the
first place, I think one of the major lessons
learned is that you do not get into an involvement
like that on that scale unless you're willing to
commit the nation to do it.
We just learned the same lesson the French did. The
French people got tired of being involved and
that's why the French wound up in a situation of
being given food.
So would it have taken more civilian advisors?
Should we have started at the village level? We
already had people in the division at the village
level. You have to realize that Vietnamese
culture was not understood very well by most
people. And until you understand that culture, it
can be very frustrating when all your efforts seem
to go for nothing. It's an entirely different
culture than that.
So what lessons should we have learned from being
here? Well, I think there are a great number. It
depends on where you want to start and what area.
Any military lessons? Well, yeah, I think there
are a lot of military lessons learned. First off,
one of the biggest things we learned is that we can
project force into a rather hostile environment,
into places which are not well-developed. And the
first time I went to Vietnam, I came over the beach,
so that would give you an idea. The next time I
landed, no. So I think that we've learned that we
can indeed carry out warfare at all scales in any
kind of environment, and we have the ability to do
that. I think we learned some lessons about tour
links, command links, I think we learned some
lessons about structure and organization for
that type of war, too. How? Well, I think that most
of the people who were in high-level positions in
command had not had that experience, OK? And
having said that, they had had experience in more
conventional warfare in, say, Korea in our World
War II. Those conventional formations
frequently were not well suited to the job at hand.
And tailoring the forces to the situation and to
the mission was very crucial. Because we
initially had forces that were tailored to
attack, seize, and hold terrain. Well, having
done that, so what? You haven't accomplished much
because the Vietnamese were perfectly prepared
to sit there and see if you're going to sit there 10
years on it. Were the VC good fighters? Some were.
Some were excellent fighters. Some of them were
veterans of the wars against the French. I imagine
some of them had been fighting 20 years. Well, the
majority of the VC there were inexperienced. The
NVA were good fighters. They were professionals.
One of the bigger political lessons learned, I
think, was we got confused, in my view, at the
political level early. Because even as early as
65, 66, 67, I used to hear people talking about was
there this business of if we drive north, will it
draw the Chinese into the war? Well, I always
consider that to be an absolutely ludicrous
statement because the Chinese would never have
supported the Vietnamese other than in a cursory
fashion. The Russians were supporting the
Vietnamese, not the Chinese. And a lot of people
felt that the Vietnamese were the puppets of the
Chinese. No way. The Vietnamese and Chinese hate
each other.
Certainly there were a great number of Chinese
weapons being used by the Vietnamese, but I think
that that was misinterpreted as China supplying
these. What it really was is the Russians buying
them and sent them in through China. Just a
convenient way of doing business. Was there much
subversion
from the south side? In South Vietnam, was there
much subversion going on? Sure. You mean with
respect to the local governments and so forth?
Yes, sir. Oh, absolutely. Of course, that was a
D.C. mission. Assassination and so forth. Sure.
That, plus just general indoctrination. So one of
the things that, well, I could spend about an hour
talking about what you've got to do with these
people. I think that's kind of important to
understand. Can you briefly describe how they
would be different for us, or how ? I just wrote
myself some notes here this afternoon while we
were thinking about it. When you talk about VC, you
really have to think of them in terms of people.
The Vietnamese are different. First off, they've
got a group orientation, rather than an
individual orientation. And that's totally
alien to the Western society. Your orientation is
individual. Theirs is as a group. And they have
very strong feelings of community, of Vietnam as a
whole, as I say. They trace their culture back to
about 500 B.C. And they are no stranger to war.
They've been at it since about 500 B.C. And they've
been occupied by several cultures. The Chinese
twice, the Japanese once, the French, the British
in recent years. So they have a... a kind of, I won't
call it nationalistic, more a philosophical idea
about the commonality of themselves as a people or
as a group rather than as any individual. And they
have a strong sense of their right to statehood as a
free and independent state reunited north and
south and all of that. And you really have to take a
hard look at the division and how that took place
when were there to understand that as a rather
large mistake. But it had to be done as an expedient
to keep the North from just overrunning the South
at that time. Vietnamese have what I call terminal
loyalty to this thought of their independence as a
people separate from any other people in the
world.
And they really have what I would call low esteem
for individualism, except for their heroes. And
their heroes are the ones who did things which, you
know, they died for the group. Such as? Yeah, a lot
of them. So these are the people. They are very
strongly nationalistic. I noted here that, first
off, they've got a sense of shared values. The
Vietnamese people feel that their values are
shared all with each other, north or south, and
with no one else in the world. Some of their values
are different. Secondly, they've got a common and
unique language. It's a romanticized, oriental
language. They speak French fluently
throughout, and English. As I say, they're a
unique ethnic group because they can find their
beginnings way back when. And they've got about
15% minorities, which are definitely oppressed.
Who would be a minority? Mainly the tribesmen. The
tribesmen? Yeah. I forget on the, was it
Montagnards? Montagnards, yeah. There are some
Cambodian strains, there are some Laotian
strains, which are more closely related in
commonality to Laotians. Cambodians don't care
for it. A lot of Chinese live in the big cities. And
they're oppressed? The Chinese weren't because
they were rich. They went to all the restaurants in
Saigon, for example, and things like that. They
are no longer in charge, I'll guarantee you.
They're gone. They are out of Vietnam. But the
Nords were oppressed? Yeah. Assessments in
working against fighting the VC and the North
Vietnamese were of course enlisted, because they
didn't particularly care about, you know,
whether they fought them or not. And for that
reason they were more of a mercenary group than one
united like the Vietnamese. One curious thing is
the religious mix in Vietnam. You've got Taoism,
you've got Buddhism, you've got Confucianism,
you've got Christianity, which is predominantly
Catholic, and then you've got a couple of weird
offshoots called Khao Dai and Wawa, which are
really cults more than religions. But because of
that, there is no strong thread of religion and
nationalism. I don't understand. Well, what I'm
saying is there's no religion which tends to be the
national religion. Okay. What I'm telling you is
religion is subordinated in the Vietnam society
to nationalism. Well, how did such a split occur?
If it's such a nationalistic country, how did...
Well, it was political, predominantly. You have a
situation where North Vietnam, predominantly
our Ho Chi Minh, was about to swallow the whole
country under its Marxist-Leninist philosophy.
I see. In the South, they felt that they wanted to go
it alone independently. and sought to help the
Western nations to
do something. But
the infrastructure for the Viet Cong began then.
The VC wasn't something that was invented in the
60s. They've been there since the 40s. So I'm
afraid a lot of people just don't comprehend what
it takes to overcome that. And you can't sell them
Western ideals. So in my view, the essence of the
whole thing is that if you wanted to have a Vietnam
that was Western-oriented, and to me there were
some good reasons for that, then we had to make the
political, societal, and financial commitment
to see that was done, which would be a long, long
call. What would it take to do that? I don't know. Do
you get it? I don't know. We didn't have the staying
power.
Or, if you will, the national will to stay. The
Vietnamese, particularly when the North came
down in the 40s, they essentially decimated all
the school teachers. They executed them. So the
academic
structure was young, and
they consider their intellectuals to be part of
the elite. But even the elite have this attitude of
loyalty to the nation state over and above an
individual or a philosophy. So that's still . But
you see, the VCs were everywhere. And they could
live in a village undetected Because when you came
to look for them, the people had to think and look at
you and wonder, okay, you're here today, where
will you be tomorrow? And if we turn that VC over and
you leave, who comes in to find out why we did that?
So there was a strong threat of retaliation at the
village level. And would that have contributed to
the paranoia about, you know, getting bodies and
just killing people, like with the VC and
infiltrating like that? I'm not so sure about
that. I think that that was largely, again, an
effort to say, hey, we're, you know, we must be
winning because we have the bodies that are piled
up. And that's not a good measure. You're winning
when you see... You know, many other things. And
the VC had a very strong indoctrination problem.
See, they'd come into a village, and they'd round
everybody up at night, and they'd bring them in and
preach their nationalistic Marxist-Leninist
stuff at them for hours and hours on end. And who was
to stop it? One of the major problems you had in
Vietnam, as you do in Central America, is absentee
land ownership. So you've got landowners who live
back in the big cities who extract heavy taxes from
the farmers and they never see them. And you've got
the DC coming down here saying the land will be
yours, our great victory. They tell them it will be
theirs as part of the group. But still, having
ownership as part of a group would be preferable to
some of those farmers than the situation they had
where they were occupying land that they could
never own. And the best they could do to hope for is
make another crop. So with the VC of the county, how
quickly would the North have overrun the South if
they had just not had the elections in 58 and then we
hadn't intervened? Would it have been a matter of
years? I don't know. I wasn't there. So you can read
any book you want to. Most people think it would
have been a matter of months, I think. Fall and the
two Vietnams pretty well documented the strength
and structure now.